When I describe Freud’s theory to undergraduates, I typically find two different reactions. On one hand, some students are impressed with Freud’s insight into human behavior. Psychoanalytic theory helps them understand some of their own feelings and behaviors and the conflicts they wrestle with. They also see Freudian concepts at work in other people’s behavior and in creative works like literature and art. On the other hand, some students eye Freudian theory with skepticism and even ridicule. Sexual feelings in children, unconscious meanings in dreams, Oedipal desires for one’s opposite-sex parent, and the like strike them as little more than a Freudian fantasy taken too seriously. Although all of us probably embrace the personality the- ories that fit our own perceptions of human behavior, a scientific approach requires more than faith in one theory over another. What we need is evidence that Freud was correct in his characterization of human nature and psychological processes. In short, we need research.
Critics of the psychoanalytic approach sometimes charge that Freud was uncon- cerned with validating his theory. But that is not entirely correct. Freud’s writings are filled with “a passionate desire to discover ways in which the validity of psychoana- lytic findings could be established,” wrote one historian. “The search for validation pervaded his entire work” (Jahoda, 1977, p. 113). Unfortunately, Freud’s “validation” relied on methods other than empirical research, which left his work open to criti- cism. Fortunately, other psychologists have accepted the challenge of testing Freud’s ideas through rigorous experimental procedures. In addition to direct tests of Freud- ian theory, a great deal of this work has been conducted on topics either introduced or popularized by Freud. Hypnosis, slips of the tongue, anxiety, early developmental experiences, and other subjects of interest to Freud have been studied in depth by researchers.
In this chapter, we’ll examine four areas of research relevant to Freud’s theory. We begin with research on dream interpretation, with an eye to Freud’s notions about the meaning and function of our dreams. Next, we look at how researchers study some of the defense mechanisms proposed by Freud and his followers, and how these defense mechanisms change as we move from child to adult. This work is followed by research on Freud’s ideas about humor. According to psychoanalytic theory, uncon- scious motives are often expressed through jokes, cartoons, and the things we find funny. Finally, we look at the phenomenon that first piqued Freud’s curiosity about the unconscious—hypnosis. What is hypnosis, and why are some people more respon- sive to a hypnotist’s suggestions than others?
Dream InNterpretation
ext time you want to liven up a dull social gathering, ask the people around you
to describe a recent dream. Although some of us remember dreams better than others, most people have little trouble recalling a funny, bizarre, or frightening dream they’ve experienced—sometimes more than once. In my dreams, I’ve walked on clouds, been visited by cartoon characters, and interacted with talking clocks. Friends have described dreams in which they fly like Superman, discover lost cities under the sea, live inside a potato, and fight with giant spiders. When unrestricted by the laws of time and physics, nearly anything is possible.
If you are like most people, you probably wonder from time to time just what your dreams really mean. Your curiosity reflects one of Freud’s legacies to 21st-century Western culture. The notion that dreams contain hidden psychological meaning was promoted and popularized by Freud. Today, therapists from many different perspec- tives use dream interpretation as one of their therapeutic tools. But how accurate is dream interpretation? Although conducting research on dreams presents many challenges, a large number of investigators have studied this universal but mystical phenomenon. We’ll look at two questions addressed in this research. First, what do people dream about? More specifically, can we use psychoanalytic theory to predict the content of our dreams? Second, why do people dream? Freud had some definite thoughts about this, and researchers have produced findings relevant to some of these ideas. However, like other aspects of Freudian psychology, this research still leaves much room for interpretation by believers as well as skeptics.
The Meaning of Dream Content
According to Freud, what we dream about provides clues about what’s in our unconscious. Occasionally, a dream contains images or evokes emotions that we feel must mean something. Yet for the most part, our dreams are absurd, vague, or just silly images that seemingly have no relation to anything. If you were to describe one of your dreams to a traditional Freudian therapist, you would likely be told that the objects and people in your dreams are symbols, which in the Freudian tradition usually means sexual symbols. Later, psychoanalytic theorists argued that dreams represent unconscious preoccupations (Hall, 1953). That is, the unresolved conflicts we struggle with beneath our awareness surface during sleeping hours.
Dream researchers have developed various procedures to record and interpret the content of our dreams (Domhoff, 1996, 1999; Hill, 1996). Sometimes sleepers are awakened when physiological measures indicate they are probably dreaming. Other investigators rely on participants to record their dreams first thing in the morning in diaries they keep next to their beds. Still others simply ask participants to describe a recent dream or a recurrent dream.
Consistent with Freud’s intuition, investigators find the content of our dreams is not random. Although there may be no apparent explanation for some of the bizarre material that makes its way into our nighttime productions, there is evidence that dream content is often influenced by the fears, problems, and issues that capture our thoughts before we go to bed (Domhoff, 2001; Foulkes & Cavallero, 1993). One team of researchers compared the dreams of Palestinian children who lived under two very different circumstances (Valli, Revonsuo, Palkas, & Punamaki, 2006). Children living in the Gaza Strip during the time of the study had experienced years of violence and ever-present danger. In contrast, Palestinian children living in the Galilee area of Israel had a relatively peaceful existence. Dream reports revealed that the children living under constant stress had more dreams than the other children. Moreover, the stressed children’s dreams included many more threatening events than the children who lived in a less stressful world. Clearly, the stressed children’s dreams at night reflected the fears they faced during the day.
But what about unconscious conflicts? Can issues we are not consciously aware of make their presence known in our dreams? Some research suggests they can. Consider a series of investigations comparing how often male and female characters appear in dreams. Think of a recent dream of your own. Were there more male or female charac- ters? The answer will depend, in part, on your own gender. Several investigations find that women typically have an equal number of male and female characters in their dreams. However, despite stereotypes about men dreaming only of beautiful women, in truth men are much more likely to dream about male characters (Hall, 1984; Hall & Domhoff, 1963). As shown in Table 4.1, this difference is found at all ages and in nearly every cul- ture. The combined findings of all these studies suggest that males make up about 50% of the characters in women’s dreams, but about 65% of the characters in men’s dreams.
Why are nearly two thirds of the characters in men’s dreams other males? One explanation relates back to the Oedipus complex and its female counterpart, the Electra complex (Hall, 1984). According to Freudian theory, men never completely overcome their conflict with their fathers. Because some of these feelings are displaced onto other males, men typically experience more conflict with the men they encoun- ter than do women. If men are preoccupied with this conflict at an unconscious level, as a psychoanalytic psychologist might guess, then this preoccupation should surface in the form of male characters in their dreams.
Can we say then that the universal prevalence of male characters in men’s dreams proves this part of Freud’s theory correct? Not entirely, because other interpreta- tions are possible. For example, men may dream about men more than about women because they come into contact with more men during the day. And even if we accept that men have more conflicts with men than with women, it is still an open question as to whether this conflict is a manifestation of unresolved Oedipal feelings. None- theless, we can say that the findings from these studies are at least consistent with predictions from Freud’s theory.
Another phenomenon of interest to dream researchers is the recurrent dream. Most of us have experienced a dream that we believe we have had before. For some people, the same dream occurs every night for several nights in a row. Sometimes a dream appears off and on for months or even years. From a psychoanalytic perspec- tive, the dream reappears night after night because the conflict expressed in the dream is important yet remains unresolved. Consistent with this interpretation, researchers find most recurrent dreams include threatening images, usually situations in which the dreamer is in danger (Gauchat, Seguin, McSween-Cadieux, & Zadra, 2015; Zadra, Desjardins, & Marcotte, 2006).
This psychoanalytic interpretation is also consistent with the observation that recurrent dreamers are more likely to suffer from anxiety during waking hours than people not experiencing recurrent dreams (Brown & Donderi, 1986; Zadra, O’Brien, & Donderi, 1998). The unconscious conflict surfaces in the dream at night but is expressed in the form of anxiety during the day. However, it is also possible that the anxiety people experience during the day causes the recurring dreams at night. One study compared the number of recurrent dreams students experienced during exam weeks versus weeks without exams (Duke & Davidson, 2002). Students who experi- enced recurrent dreams had considerably more of these dreams during exam weeks than when they were under less stress.
But what about the most provocative aspect of Freud’s dream interpretation theory—that seemingly innocent objects and actions are symbolic representations of sexuality and sexual activity? According to the psychoanalytic perspective, people who are anxious about sexual matters often express their sexual through other out- lets, such as in dream symbols. To test this hypothesis, one team of researchers asked
participants to keep diaries of their dreams and their daily level of anxiety for 10 days (Robbins, Tanck, & Houshi, 1985). Consistent with the psychoanalytic position, the higher the participants’ anxiety level, the more often classic Freudian sexual symbols (pencils, boxes, flying) appeared in their dreams.
So, was Freud correct about dream symbols? Although researchers sometimes find results that support psychoanalytic theory, direct and convincing tests of the notion that dream images are sexual symbols remain elusive. Most dream researchers agree that the content of our dreams is not random. But determining why some images appear in our dreams more often than others remains a challenge.
The Function of Dreams
A more difficult question than what people dream is why people dream at all. Freud maintained that unconscious impulses cannot be suppressed forever. Therefore, one of the major functions of dreams is to allow the symbolic expression of these impulses. Dreams provide a safe and healthy outlet for expressing unconscious conflicts. But researchers had to wait for technology to catch up with theory before they could investigate this aspect of Freud’s theory.
In the 1950s, researchers discovered that mammals experience two distinctly different kinds of sleep (Aserinsky & Kleitman, 1953). Each night we alternate between periods of REM (rapid eye movement) sleep and non-REM sleep. REM sleep is usually accompanied by rapidly moving eyes underneath closed lids and is sometimes called paradoxical sleep because, although our muscles are especially relaxed during this time, our brain activity is similar to that of the waking state. Most adults spend 11⁄2 to 2 hours a night in REM sleep, spread over several periods.
The significance of this discovery for personality researchers is that REM sleep is filled with dreams, whereas non-REM sleep has significantly fewer dreams. Thus, the discovery of REM sleep created new opportunities for dream researchers. Research- ers could look at the effects of depriving people of REM sleep, they could correlate psychological variables with the length and amount of REM sleep, and they could wake people during REM sleep to capture dreams that might be lost by morning (Arkin, Antrobus, & Ellman, 1978; Cohen, 1979).
What did REM sleep research reveal about the relationship between dreaming and mental health? Early researchers maintained that REM sleep, and therefore dreaming, was necessary for psychological health and that depriving someone of REM sleep might create serious psychological disturbances. Subsequent research has chal- lenged this conclusion (Hoyt & Singer, 1978; Vogel, 1975), but dreaming does seem to have some psychological benefits. Emotional disorders are often associated with sleep difficulties and reduced REM sleep (Palagini, Baglioni, Ciapparelli, Gemignani, & Riemann, 2013; Walker & van der Helm, 2009). In addition, individuals deprived of REM sleep have more difficulty with stressful tasks (McGrath & Cohen, 1978). Par- ticipants in one study were shown a film before and after a night’s sleep (Greenberg, Pillard, & Pearlman, 1978). The film depicted a physician performing an autopsy in gruesome detail and was selected for the study because it invariably created high lev- els of anxiety in viewers. Participants deprived of REM sleep had a difficult time cop- ing with their anxiety when viewing the film a second time. Participants allowed to dream between showings of the film were significantly less disturbed by it.
Other research findings are consistent with Freud’s notion that dreams provide an outlet for suppressed thoughts. Trauma victims who avoid thinking about their expe- rience during the day often have dreams about the traumatic event at night (Mellman, David, Bustamante, Torres, & Fins, 2001). Participants in one study were asked to spend five minutes before they went to sleep either thinking and writing about some- one they felt fondly or romantically toward or repressing thoughts about this person and writing about something else (Wegner, Wenslaff, & Kozak, 2004). That night, participants who had repressed their thoughts had more dreams about their target person than did the other participants.
Interpreting the Evidence
What can we conclude about the experimental support for Freud’s theory of dream interpretation? On one hand, researchers have produced a number of findings consis- tent with Freud’s speculations. The content of our dreams is not random, and dream- ing appears to serve some positive psychological functions. However, in almost all cases, psychologists can account for the findings without relying on Freudian con- cepts. Moreover, researchers have also uncovered results that are difficult to explain within Freudian theory (Domhoff, 2004). For example, why do newborn babies expe- rience as much as 8 hours of REM sleep per day? What unconscious conflicts are they working out? For that matter, REM sleep has been found in nearly all mammals and possibly even in human fetuses (Crick & Mitchison, 1983). In other words, the search for definitive answers to some of the questions Freud raised continues.
