What Types of Studies Are Used in
Psychological Research?
Once a researcher has defined a hypothesis, the next issue to be addressed is the
type of research method to be used. There are three main types of research meth-
ods: descriptive, correlational, and experimental. These methods differ in the extent
to which the researcher has control over the variables in the study. The amount of
control over the variables in turn determines the type of conclusions the researcher
can draw from the data.
All research involves variables. A variable is something in the world that can vary
and that the researcher can manipulate (change), measure (evaluate), or both. In a
study of texting and driving ability, some of the variables would be number of texts
sent, number of texts received, familiarity with the texting device, how coordinated a
person is, and driving ability and cell phone experience.
2.5 Descriptive Research Consists
of Case Studies, Observation,
and Self-Report Methods
Descriptive research involves observing behavior to describe that behavior objec-
tively and systematically. Descriptive research helps scientists achieve the goals of
describing what phenomena are and (sometimes) predicting when or with what other
­ phenomena they may occur. However, by nature, descriptive research cannot achieve
the goals of control and explanation (only the true experimental method, described
later in this chapter, can do that).
Descriptive methods are widely used to assess many types of behavior. For ­ example,
an observer performing descriptive research might record the types of foods that peo-
ple eat in cafeterias, count the number and types of mating behaviors that penguins
engage in during their mating season, or tally the number of times poverty or mental
illness is mentioned during a presidential debate (FIGURE 2.7). Each of these obser-
vations offers important information that can be used to describe current behavior
and even predict future behavior. In no case does the investigator control the behavior
being observed or explain why any particular behavior occurred.
There are three basic types of descriptive research methods: case studies, observa-
tions, and self-report methods and interviews.
CASE STUDIES A case study is the intensive examination of an unusual person
or organization. By intensive examination, we mean observation, recording, and
description. An individual might be selected for intensive study if he or she has a spe-
cial or unique aspect, such as an exceptional memory, a rare disease, or a specific type
of brain damage. An organization might be selected for intensive study because it is
doing something very well (such as making a lot of money) or very poorly (such as
losing a lot of money). The goal of a case study is to describe the events or experiences
that lead up to or result from the exceptional aspect.
One famous case study in psychological science involves a young American man
whose freak injury impaired his ability to remember new information (Squire, 1987).
N.A. was born in 1938. After a brief stint in college, he joined the Air Force and was
stationed in the Azores, where he was trained to be a radar technician. One night, he
was assembling a model airplane in his room. His roommate was joking around with a
miniature fencing foil, pretending to jab at the back of N.A.’s head. When N.A. turned
around suddenly, his roommate accidentally stabbed N.A. through the nose and up
into his brain (FIGURE 2.8).
Although N.A. seemed to recover from his injury in most ways, he developed
extreme problems remembering events that happened to him during the day. He could
remember events before his accident, and so he was able to live on his own, keeping
his house tidy and regularly cutting his lawn. It was new information that he could not
remember. He had trouble watching television because he forgot the storylines, and
he had difficulty holding conversations because he forgot what others had just said.
Subsequent studies of N.A.’s brain using imaging techniques revealed damage to spe-
cific regions not traditionally associated with memory difficulties (Squire, Amaral,
Zola-Morgan, Kritchevsky, & Press, 1989). The case study of N.A. helped researchers
develop new models of the brain mechanisms involved in memory.
However, not everyone who suffers damage to this brain region experiences the
same types of problems as N.A. Such differences highlight the major problem with
case studies. Because only one person or organization is the focus of a case study,
scientists cannot tell from that study if the same thing would happen to other people
or organizations who have the same experience(s). The findings from case
studies do not necessarily generalize, or apply to the general population.
OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES Two main types of observational techniques
are used in research: participant observation and naturalistic observation. In
participant observation (FIGURE 2.9), the researcher is involved in the situa-
tion. In naturalistic observation (FIGURE 2.10), the observer is passive, sepa-
rated from the situation and making no attempt to change or alter ongoing
behavior.
These observational techniques involve the systematic assessment
and coding of overt behavior. Suppose you hear about a person who was
texting while walking, stumbled off a curb, and was killed by an oncoming
truck. You develop the hypothesis that using a cell phone while walking can
cause problems with walking. How do you operationally define “problems
with walking”? Once you have defined your terms, you need to code the
forms of behavior you will observe. Your coding might involve written sub-
jective assessments (e.g., “He almost got hit by a car when he walked into
traffic”). Alternatively, your coding might use predefined categories (e.g.,
“1. Walked slowly,” “2. Walked into traffic,” “3. Stumbled”). Perhaps, after
recording your data, you would create an index of impaired walking behav-
ior by adding together the frequencies of each coded category. You might
then compare the total number of coded behaviors when people were using
a cell phone or not. Studies such as these have shown that cell phone use
does impair walking ability (Schwebel et al., 2012; Stavrinos, Byington, &
Schwebel, 2011). Pedestrian accidents—not all of them involving cell
phones—kill more than 500 college-age students per year and injure more
than 12,000 (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2012b).
SELF-REPORTS AND INTERVIEWS Ideally, observation is an unobtrusive
approach for studying behavior. By contrast, asking people about themselves,
their thoughts, their actions, and their feelings is a much more interactive
way of collecting data. Methods of posing questions to participants include
surveys, interviews, and questionnaires. The type of information sought
ranges from demographic facts (e.g., ethnicity, age, religious affiliation) to
past behaviors, personal attitudes, beliefs, and so on: “Have you ever used an
illegal drug?” “Should people who drink and drive be jailed for a first offense?”
“Are you comfortable sending food back to the kitchen in a restaurant when
there is a problem?” Questions such as these require people to recall certain
events from their lives or reflect on their mental or emotional states.
Self-report methods, such as surveys or questionnaires, can be used to
gather data from a large number of people in a short time (FIGURE 2.11). Ques-
tions can be mailed out to a sample drawn from the population of interest or handed
out in appropriate locations. They are easy to administer and cost-efficient.
Interviews, another type of interactive method, can be used successfully with
groups that cannot be studied through surveys or questionnaires, such as young chil-
dren. Interviews are also helpful in gaining a more in-depth view of a respondent’s
opinions, experiences, and attitudes. Thus, the answers from interviewees some-
times inspire avenues of inquiry that the researchers had not planned. (For a recap of
the types of research methods, see FIGURE 2.12.)
