method for nightmares and recurrent anxiety dreams. If, for example, the dream involves a panicky flight from a monster, the patient is en- couraged to relive the image but to move toward the fearsome object and explore it cautiously step by step.
A vivid tape-recorded-transcription depicts the exact pattern in which Johnsgard develops his technique. The patient in one instance was plagued by a recurrent nightmare in which he is caught sitting on the toilet with a scorpion nearby. The room tilts so that he has to hang on to the rickety toilet just above the scorpion. The therapist encourages him to revisualize the dream and then to tilt the room down so his situation is less precarious. The patient imagines himself leaving the room and then returns to feed the scorpion some dead flies. This even- tuates in some dramatic changes in imagery and is followed by the patient imagining the frightening object as inside himself with a sense of great completeness. After much journeying, in a fashion quite similar to that found in the European protocols, there is a movement out of a cave into a clearing with a strong positive emotional upsurge. In subsequent discussion the patient indicates his realization that the scorpion was not really his powerful father as he suspected earlier but rather his own angry or destructive tendencies which he now could accept as a genuine part of himself. Johnsgard discusses symbolism in the material, e.g., a fountain, and indicates his belief that its meaning goes deeper than the maternal image suggested by a Freudian position, and may repre- sent a central core of being in Jung's usage. The outcome of the case suggests a broader personality change rather than symptom relief alone.
Gerard (1964) has proposed an extensive translation of the European imagery methods in his description of an individual therapy called psychosynthesis. The most extensive use of imagery techniques in psy- chotherapy can now, however, be found in the encounter groups, marathons, T-groups, sensitivity-training, and related forms of what can only be described as a national craze rather than as a systematic new treatment method. Although Bach (1954) employed group fantasy rather early in his work on group therapy, most of the developments in this field have emerged in the mid 1960s. The imagery methods, many adapted from Désoille or Leuner, although perhaps also owing a debt to Moreno's psychodramatic techniques, are clearly used as part of the general games techniques that prevail in these groups. Indeed, Alexander
(1969) has called attention to the fact that many of these methods are applications (as suggested earlier) of children's play therapy for use with adults in the hope of breaking down the civilities, formalities, and evasions of ordinary verbal intercourse.
One cannot avoid admiration for the ingenuity of many of the group