That spectacle was a shock to me, but Belonísia was snickering as she joined me. My mother, washing the cookware with water I'd brought back from the river earlier that day, left the pans on the jirau outside and came running into the room. "What's all this?" she asked, charging forward to separate the sisters. "Get over here," glaring at Belonísia and me, "and help me out." We held on to Crispiniana's arms.
Her eyes were swollen from tears; her hair was a disaster. My mother grabbed hold of Crispina, the disturbed one. Her eyes were glassy, and her mouth repeated the accusations she'd leveled earlier at her sister. My mother threatened to call Saturnino to take both of them back home, "and then there's nothing doing, we won't help you, and I won't allow you back here, Crispina." Shaken by the threat, Crispina broke down in her arms, resting her head on my mother's chest. Salustiana Nicolau ordered Crispiniana to take the two of us outside, so she could be alone with her sister.
Crispiniana straightened up her torn clothes and walked out into the backyard. She was weeping quietly, then, when she was done with tears, she picked up the utensils my mother had been washing and finished the chore for her.
Belonísia and I remained in the center room, pretending to play in silence so we could listen to what Crispina told our mother. She continued saying what she'd said before, that she'd found her boyfriend lying down with her sister in the woods behind his house; that she was overcome by rage, a rage she'd never known before. She couldn't think straight, something evil had got into her; it was disturbing her mind.
She'd only started thinking clearly again after spending those few weeks at our house, and slowly it was all coming back to her, everything that had happened just before she ran away.
We were already familiar with the rest of the story from hearing Saturnino tell it when he arrived, but also from the gossip of neighbors, compadres, and comadres who spread. the news up and down the paths that crisscrossed the planta-tion. After Crispina had vanished without a trace, her father, boyfriend, and siblings went searching for her in the fields, in the woods surrounding the Santo Antônio River and in the marshes and wetlands, without success. Crispina's father, tormented by her sudden disappearance, walked all the way into town to seek help from the police. Every day he'd hear a different story: that Crispina had been seen heading to a village not far from the plantation, or boarding a bus to the capital, or that someone had heard a madwoman shrieking in the night. Or even that she'd been spotted stealing fruit from someone's backyard and that compadre Domingos had fired his rifle at the thief, believing he'd seen a fox, and so Saturnino rushed over, but when he got there, his legs wobbly, he discovered the story wasn't true.
Eight days had passed when a gravedigger at the cemetery in town happened on Crispina sleeping among the tombs.
She was unable to explain who she was, much less where she lived or what she was doing there. She was discovered just after All Souls' Day, surrounded by shriveled flowers retaining the scent of things wilted and diminished by their fugacity — wild angelicas, chrysanthemums and lilies left by well-off families, alongside flowers fashioned from wire and crêpe paper, shredded by the passing of time, the flowers