Macroeconomic Questions
Until now we’ve been studying microeconomics: how individuals, households, firms, and governments make choices, and how those choices affect the allocation of resources, the well-being of other agents, and the prices of specific goods and services. Now it’s time to turn to macroeconomics. Recall from Chapter 1 that macroeconomics is the study of economic aggregates and economy-wide phenomena, like the annual growth rate of a country’s total economic output, or the annual percentage increase in the total cost of living. Macro, which is shorthand for macroeconomics, is our new topic.
Macroeconomic analysis explains past patterns in aggregate economic activity and tries to predict future changes. For example, macroeconomists are interested in the enormous differences in income across countries and the creation of policies that would enable the countries with lower income to catch up. 
Income per capita—in other words, income per person—in the United States is more than twice the level in Portugal, seven times the level in China, and over one-hundred times the level in Zimbabwe. How do we measure these cross-country differences? What causes them? How long will they persist? 
China has been catching up to the United States very quickly. China’s economy has been growing four times as fast as the U.S. economy for over 30 years. Will China eventually match the level of U.S. income per capita? Will China surpass the United States? Or, will something else happen? For example, Japan experienced a long-run slowdown in economic growth starting around 1990, when its income per capita was about to overtake that of the United States. Over two decades later, the United States is still ahead. Why do growth rates slow down as income per capita rises?
What can be done to improve living conditions in impoverished nations like Zimbabwe? Annual income per capita in Zimbabwe was $369 per year in 2010, barely enough for survival. Figuring out how to make low-income countries grow faster is a question of enormous importance for human well-being. Malnutrition and lack of health- care cause tens of millions of annual deaths worldwide. If low- income countries could raise their annual growth by five percentage points, economists estimate that 50 million lives would be saved over the next 20 years.To understand how to achieve long-run economic prosperity, we need to understand how different government policies augment or undermine economic growth. Corruption and confusion can lead policymakers down the wrong path. What are the bad policies, and will we avoid them in the future?
Macroeconomists also study the year-to-year, or “short-run,” fluc- tuations in economic activity. Why does economic growth sometimes stall, or turn negative? We call an economic downturn lasting at least two quarters a
recession (a quarter is one-fourth of a year).
During recessions the unemployment rate, one of the most important macroeconomic
variables, rises. A person is officially unemployed if three conditions are satisfied: he or she (1) does not have a job, (2) has actively looked for work in the prior four weeks, and (3) is currently available for work. Fluctuations in the unemployment rate—the fraction of the labor force that is unemployed—are covered in detail in Chapter 23.
To see an example of economic fluctuations, consider the period from 2007 to 2009, when the U.S. economy shrank by 4.3 percent and the unemployment rate rose from 5 percent to 10 percent. At the same time, the world experienced a series of financial crises, including stock market crashes, collapsing housing prices, mortgage defaults, and bank failures. Why did these events occur, and what should governments have done to reduce their severity? What caused worldwide stock markets to lose over half their value in a year’s time? Why did so many major banks suddenly become insolvent? 
Though the financial crisis of 2007–2009 was calamitous, it does not hold a candle to the Great Depression, which stretched from 1929 to 1939. From 1929 to 1933, production fell by nearly 30 percent and the unemployment rate rose from 3 percent to 25 percent of the labor force. In July 1932, the U.S. stock market reached the bottom of an 87 percent roller-coaster plunge from its peak in September, 1929. Are there policies that will enable us to avoid such disasters in the future? Or are we only able to respond after the fact? Could the 2007–2009 financial crisis have turned into another Great Depression?
These are all important questions. To answer them, we need some special tools and new models. The first thing that we must do is measure the thing we are studying: a coun- try’s aggregate economy. This is a seemingly impossible task. How can we measure the total activity of millions of economic agents? A hundred years ago, nobody knew how to do this. Fortunately, economic science has progressed. Today, we have a framework called the national income accounts, which we use to measure the entire economy. In the United States, the formal name for this system of national accounts is the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). Once we understand how the national income accounts works, we will be ready to start answering the interesting and important questions posed above. National income accounts measure the level of aggregate economic activity in a country.
The National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) is the system of national income accounts that is used by the U.S. government.
