The Dominican Diaspora Strikes Back: Cultural Archive and Race in Junot Díaz’s The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
While scholars of African diasporic discourse such as Paul Gilroy and Stuart Hall have tended to focus on the historical and social relation- ships between Africa, the Anglophonic Caribbean, and Britain, much work still needs to be done by incorporating the Spanish Caribbean and its diaspora in the United States into the critical conversations of the triangular African/Black Atlantic.1 Silvio Torres-Saillant, the prominent scholar of the Dominican diaspora, has contributed much critical and historical groundwork for understanding the connection between racial discourse and literature of the Dominican Republic and Dominican immigrants and their descendants, the diaspora, who arrived in waves, due to economic hardships, to the mainland United States in the 1970s and onward Through critical articles, books, and interviews with writers like Junot Díaz, Torres-Saillant has begun a critical foundation for Dominican diasporic literature and culture in dialogue with the Dominican motherland, but he also considers the complexity of transnational history and race matters in the migrations between island and mainland. In this essay, I suggest that Torres-Saillant’s preoccupation with Afro- Dominican diasporic identity is in direct dialogue with Gilroy’s critical paradigm of the triangular “Black Atlantic” for both critics emphasize the significance of the African heritage/black presence in the Caribbean and the implications of its racial legacy in their diasporic communities in the United States or Britain. Similar to the West Indian community that arrived in England by the end of the 1940s (the Windward generation), the Afro-Dominican émigré population that landed in the east coast of the United States can be characterized by its working-class orientation that forms one of the labor forces in factories and public services follow- ing the Puerto Rican migratory trajectory of the 1950s. The children of these immigrants on the east coast are considered Dominican Americans or the Dominican diaspora, to which Junot Díaz belongs.3 A writer who emerged in the 1990s, Díaz reveals in his fiction the inherent complications that, already in existence on the island, have affected displacement and migration to the United States. Torres-Saillant states, Whatever suffering Dominicans have endured in the foreign shores where despair has expelled them, they have also learned to see them- selves more fully, more fairly, particularly in matters of race. The long struggles for equality and social justice by people of color in the United States have yielded invaluable lessons from which Dominican people in the diaspora and in the Dominican Republic have drawn and may continue to draw empowerment. The diaspora will render an inestimable service to the Dominican people if it can help to rid the country of white supremacist thought and negro-phobic discourse, to whatever extent those aberrations may survive in Dominican society, and allow finally a celebration of our rich African heritage. (1109, my emphasis) Similar to Gilroy’s “transatlantic” voyages of communities crossing initially and involuntarily from Africa to the Caribbean eventually to England forming a “Black British” identity, Torres-Saillant suggests that the Dominican diaspora can play a crucial role in fomenting a new consciousness of what it means to be Afro-Dominican, a double diaspora, which consists of a two-part journey from Africa to Hispaniola (present Haiti and the Dominican Republic) and then to the United States.
The comparison of the two critical paradigms constructed by Gilroy and Torres-Saillant is important because Dominican history and the representation of race, or acknowledgment of the African heritage, has been suppressed or “de-racialized” according to Torres-Saillant, so that to affirm any part of this cultural ancestry in this day and age translates into the birth of an Afro-Dominican diasporic renaissance, especially in Afro-Dominican letters in the United States and African diasporic literature at large.4 In his Pulitzer Prize-winning first novel The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao (2007), Junot Díaz engages the cultural archive of African racial discourse that contests the dominance of U.S. imperialism and modern globalization. In the long-awaited The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, critically acclaimed Díaz introduces the multi-faceted world of the Afro-Dominican American protagonist, Oscar de León (a.k.a. Oscar Wao), through a recon- figuration of race and genealogy between Africa, the Dominican Republic and the United States to insist on an alternative masculinity to traditional gender roles. Best-known for his collection of short fiction Drown (1996), Díaz seduces the reading public with his latest oeuvre based on a young Afro-Latino adolescent coming of age in the world of science fiction and fantasy in Paterson, New Jersey. Díaz not only evokes sympathy for the character of Oscar, but he also demonstrates that young Latino males can aspire to pursue their dreams and enter imaginary worlds despite the odds against them in a New Jersey working-class barrio, a place that may not afford them many opportunities as they grow older. In The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, Díaz offers a compelling narrative of how race and gender expectations in the representation of genealogy can influence self-perception and self-esteem in the social and intellectual formation of a young Afro-Latino student. Díaz divides the novel into seven chapters, beginning with “Ghetto Nerd at the End of the World, 1974–1987” and ending with “The Final Voyage,” jumping chronologically throughout the twentieth century. By incorporating a testimonial narrator in the voice of Yunior (also, a prevalent character as a young boy in many short stories of Drown), Díaz devises “an objective” perspective, familiar yet removed from the protagonist Oscar’s family, to recount the youthful days of friendship between Yunior and Oscar de León, an outsider due to his overweight body image. Through a colloquial voice using both slang and eloquent vocabulary, Díaz constructs an “accessible” narrator in Yunior who has the ability to address a younger generation of urban readers but also appeals to audiences of all ages through his humor, irony, and stylistic influences.5 Furthermore, Díaz’s fast-paced linguistic technique permits the narrator to bond with a younger circle of readers on contemporary matters such as technological dependency, body image, and the search for the perfect love. In a footnote of the novel, the narrator captures the spirit of Oscar’s persona, “You really want to know what being an X-Man feels like? Just be a smart bookish boy of color and in a contemporary U.S. ghetto. Mamma mia! Like having bat wings or a pair of tentacles growing out of your chest” (22). The fact that Díaz considers Oscar a boy of color suggests that the author wishes to enter a racial discourse in the United States.
