In DS, life remains the most-engaged construct, but some smaller players make more of a showing: doubt, emotion, courage, fear, and virtue. As Anthony Jensen () shows in his definitive monograph, HL was composed and produced in such a disordered rush that the official version doesn’t even contain all and only the paragraphs that Nietzsche wished to publish. It seems that Nietzsche was unsatisfied even with the title and wished to use instead We Historians: On the Historical Sickness of the Modern Soul. This jibes with Nietzsche’s own evaluation of HL in EH, where he claims that the essence of the work is a critique of the historical sickness. The text was composed in three main parts: sections – were written first and then were sandwiched between the Foreword and a dashed-off version of section  that was not even Nietzsche’s own final text. Both Nietzsche’s final version of section  and several significant changes he made to the proofs of the rest of the text were ignored by his publishers, making the version of HL we have a kind of penultimate draft. The most prominent constructs in HL are life, doubt, fear, forgetting, instinct, justice, value, and virtue. And the emotions of contempt and disgust have a nontrivial part to play in helping the just historian to disregard and forget past events and persons who are not worthy of agonistic challenge. The most important connections are life-drive, life-fear, life-
doubt, life-forgetting, and life-instinct.
In the third Untimely Meditation, Nietzsche treats Schopenhauer as an
exemplary genius with the potential to inspire German culture. He thus puts Schopenhauer on the kind of pedestal that he associates, in HL, with monumental history. The version of Schopenhauer in SE, however, also plays the role of the agonistic exemplar celebrated in HL. Indeed, in SE , Nietzsche claims that the point of an exemplar like Schopenhauer is not to emulate him but to be inspired by him and other “true educators and formative teachers” to realize that “the true, original meaning and basic stuff of your nature is something completely incapable of being educated or formed ... your true educators can be only your liberators.” While Nietzsche may not maintain exactly this position later, he here intimates a point that I will argue for at more length in Chapters  and : human excellence is not, as Aristotle and contemporary neo-Aristotelians would have it, purely a matter of acquired dispositions. Excellence can also be innate and instinctual. Reflecting in an agonistic mood on SE more than a decade later, Nietzsche goes so far as to say that when he refers to Schopenhauer in this Untimely Meditation, he really means to refer to himself (EH Books.UM.–). Thus, the ideal of becoming what you are through a process of self-discovery already crops up in Nietzsche’s thought