
Alongside Allport and Murray, we find another pioneer of the trait approach,
Raymond Cattell. Unlike many theorists, Cattell did not begin with insightful notions about the elements that make up human personality. Rather, he borrowed an approach used in other sciences. Notably, Cattell’s first college degree was in chemistry. He argued that just as chemists did not begin by guessing what chemical elements might exist, psychologists should not begin with a preconceived list of personality traits.
Much of Cattell’s work was devoted to discovering just how many basic personality traits there are. Although psychologists have identified, measured, and researched hundreds of traits as if each trait were independent from the others, Cattell believed many traits are related. For example, being sociable is not entirely different from being extraverted, although we can point to some fine distinctions. In his quest to discover the structure of human personality, Cattell employed a statistical technique called factor analysis. Although a complete understanding of the procedure is beyond the scope of this book, an example can illustrate how researchers use factor analysis to determine the relationship between personality traits. Suppose you had tests to measure the following 10 traits: aspiration, compassion, cooperativeness, determination, endurance, friendliness, kindliness, persistence, productivity, and tenderness. You could give these tests to a group of people and obtain 10 scores per person. You might then use correlation coefficients (Chapter 2) to examine how scores on one test compare with scores on the other nine tests. For example, you might find that friendliness and tenderness scores are highly correlated. If a person scores high on one test, you can predict with some confidence that the person also will score high on the other test. Looking at the pattern of correlation coefficients, you might discover that the tests tend to cluster into two groups. That is, five of the tests are highly correlated with one another, but not with the other five tests. These other five tests are similarly correlated among themselves, but not with the tests in the first group. The two groups might look something like this: 
Group A: aspiration determination endurance persistence productivity. Group B compassion cooperativeness friendliness kindliness tenderness. Although you originally measured 10 traits, a reasonable conclusion would be that you actually measured two larger personality dimensions, one having to do with achievement and the other with interpersonal warmth. This is a simple illustration of Cattell’s basic approach. By analyzing data from various sources with factor analyses, he attempted to determine how many of these basic elements exist. He called the basic traits that make up the human personality source traits.
Unfortunately, data obtained from factor analyses typically are not as neat and clear-cut as this example suggests. If they were, we would have determined the number of source traits a long time ago. One serious limitation of factor analysis is that the procedure is confined by the type of data chosen for analysis. For example, what would happen if you took a few tests out of the previous example and inserted a few new ones, such as independence, absentmindedness, and honesty? Most likely, this would change the number of categories (called factors) and the traits associated with them (or, in factor analytic terms, “loaded on” them).
In response to this problem, Cattell collected information about personality from many different sources. In addition to data from personality tests, he examined personal records, such as report cards and ratings by employers, and looked at how people acted when placed in lifelike situations. From this work, Cattell identified 16 basic traits, and created a personality test, the Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16 PF), to measure them. A revised version of the 16 PF remains a widely used personality inventory today (Cattell, 2004; Cattell & Mead, 2008).
The Big Five
Efforts to identify and describe the basic dimensions of personality did not end with Cattell’s original model. Rather, this question has been an ongoing issue in personality research for decades. One particularly interesting study often lost in the long history of this research was conducted by Donald Fiske (1949). In the summer of 1947, Fiske and his colleagues conducted an extensive personality assessment of 128 men who had been admitted into the Veteran Administration’s clinical psychology training program. In addition to many standard trait measures, the assessment included projective tests, biographical data, interviews, and ratings from peers. When the researchers factor analyzed all these data, they identified five basic personality factors. They described these five factors as Social Adaptability (talkative, makes good company), Emotional Control (easily upset, has sustained anxieties), Conformity (ready to cooperate, conscientious), The Inquiring Intellect (intellectual curiosity, an exploring mind), and Confident Self-Expression (cheerful, not selfish). Although the data were not quite as clean as these labels suggest, as we will see, the findings foreshadowed the direction personality research would take decades later.
Cattell, Fiske, and the other pioneers in this area faced some practical limitations on their work. They had to calculate the extensive mathematical computations required of factor analysis by hand and, of course, double check each decimal point and each carried number. Personality researchers today have the benefit of larger and more varied sets of data, sophisticated statistical tests, and—most important—computers that conduct extensive calculations quickly and accurately. These developments led to a burgeoning amount of research with a surprisingly consistent pattern in the findings. Although there may never be complete agreement, different teams of investigators using many different kinds of data repeatedly found evidence for five basic dimensions of personality (Digman, 1990; Goldberg, 1992; John, Nauman, & Soto, 2008; McCrae & Costa, 1997, 2008). The five basic factors uncovered in this research look like the ones listed in Table 7.1. 
Factor: Neuroticism
Characteristics: Worried versus calm; Insecure versus secure; Self-pitying versus self-satisfied.
Factor: Extraversion
Characteristics: Sociable versus retiring; Fun-loving versus sober; Affectionate versus reserved
Factor: Openness
Characteristics: Imaginative versus down-to-earth; Preference for variety versus preference for routine; Independent versus conforming.
Factor: Agreeableness
Characteristics: Softhearted versus ruthless;Trusting versus suspicious; Helpful versus uncooperative.
Factor: Conscientiousness
Characteristics: Well organized versus disorganized; Careful versus careless; Self- disciplined versus weak willed.
The five factors described in the table have shown up in so many studies using a variety of methods that researchers now refer to them as the Big Five. Remember, these investigators did not begin with a theory about how many factors they would find or what these basic dimensions of personality would look like. Rather, they let the data do the talking. Once researchers saw which traits clustered with one another, they had to come up with descriptive terms for the five dimensions. Although different researchers sometimes use different names, the most commonly used terms are Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness. Alert students have recognized that the beginning letters of the five labels cover the OCEAN of human personality.
The Neuroticism dimension places people along a continuum according to their emotional stability and personal adjustment. People who frequently experience emotional distress and wide swings in emotions will score high on measures of Neuroticism. People high in Neuroticism tend to become more upset over daily stressors than those low on this dimension and are more vulnerable to bouts of anxiety and depression (Chow & Roberts, 2014; Kotov, Gamez, Schmidt, & Watson, 2010; Lahey, 2009). Although there are many different kinds of negative emotions—sadness, anger, anxiety, guilt—that may have different causes and require different treatments, research consistently shows that people prone to one kind of negative emotional state often experience others (Costa & McCrae, 1992). Individuals low in Neuroticism tend to be calm, well adjusted, and not prone to extreme emotional reactions.
The second personality dimension, Extraversion, places extreme extraverts at one end and extreme introverts at the other. Extraverts are very sociable people who also tend to be energetic, optimistic, friendly, and assertive. Introverts do not typically express these characteristics, but it would be incorrect to say that they are asocial or without energy. As one team of researchers explained, “Introverts are reserved rather than unfriendly, independent rather than followers, even-paced rather than sluggish” (Costa & McCrae, 1992, p. 15). As you might imagine, studies find that extraverts have more friends and spend more time in social situations than introverts (Feiler & Kleinbaum, 2015; Selfhout et al., 2010; van der Linden, Scholte, Cillessen, te Nijenhuis, & Segers, 2010).
The Openness dimension refers to openness to experience rather than openness in an interpersonal sense. The characteristics that make up this dimension include an active imagination, a willingness to consider new ideas, divergent thinking, and intellectual curiosity. People high in Openness are unconventional and independent thinkers. Those low in Openness tend to prefer the familiar rather than seeking out something new. Given this description, it is not surprising that innovative scientists and creative artists tend to be high in Openness (Kaufman et al., 2014; Rubinstein & Strul, 2007). Some researchers refer to this dimension as Intellect, although it is certainly not the same as intelligence.
People who are high on the Agreeableness dimension are helpful, trusting, and sympathetic. Those on the other end tend to be antagonistic and skeptical. Agreeable people prefer cooperation over competition. In contrast, people low in Agreeableness like to fight for their interests and beliefs. Researchers find that people high in Agreeableness have more pleasant social interactions and fewer quarrelsome exchanges than those low on this dimension (Donnellan, Conger, & Bryant, 2004; Jensen-Campbell & Graziano, 2001; Malouff, Thorsteinsson, Schutte, Bhullar, & Rooke, 2010). They are also more willing to help those in need (Habashi, Graziano, & Hoover, 2016).
The Conscientiousness dimension refers to how controlled and self-disciplined we are. People on the high end of this dimension are organized, plan oriented, and determined. Those on the low end are apt to be careless, easily distracted from tasks, and undependable. The characteristics that define Conscientiousness often show up in achievement or work situations, which is why some researchers refer to this dimension as Will to Achieve or simply Work. But these characteristics surface in other areas of our lives as well. For example, because they are more likely to develop good health habits and take steps to keep themselves safe, people high in Conscientiousness tend to be healthier and live longer than those low on this dimension (Hampson, Edmonds, Goldberg, Dubanoski, & Hillier, 2015; Sutin et al., 2016; Turiano, Chapman, Gruenewald, & Mroczek, 2015; Weston, Hill, & Jackson, 2015).
Of course, the five factors show up when researchers look at responses to self- report trait inventories. But researchers also find evidence for five basic factors when examining other indicators of personality, such as the terms people use to describe their friends and acquaintances (Watson, Hubbard, & Wiese, 2000) and the way teachers describe their students (Digman & Inouye, 1986; Goldberg, 2001). The five factors emerge in studies with elementary school children (Markey, Markey, Tinsley, & Ericksen, 2002; Measelle, John, Ablow, Cowan, & Cowan, 2005) and appear to be fairly stable over time (Terracciano, Costa, & McCrae, 2006; Vaidya, Gray, Haig, & Watson, 2002). One team of researchers used college student interviews and questionnaire data from 1939 to 1944 to determine Big Five scores (Soldz & Vaillant, 1999). These scores correlated highly with scores on Big Five measures participants completed when they were 45 years older. 

1. The trait approach assumes we can identify individual differences in behaviors that are relatively stable across situations and over time. Trait theorists are usually not concerned with any one person’s behavior but rather with describing behavior typical of people at certain points along a trait continuum.
2. Gordon Allport was the first acknowledged trait theorist. Among his contributions were the notions of central and secondary traits, nomothetic versus idiographic research, and descriptions of the self. Henry Murray identified psychogenic needs as the basic elements of personality. According to Murray, a need will affect behavior depending on where it lies on a person’s need hierarchy and the kind of situation the person is in.
3. Raymond Cattell was interested in identifying the basic structure of personality. He used a statistical procedure called factor analysis to determine how many basic traits make up human personality. More recent research provides consistent evidence that personality is structured along five basic dimensions. Although questions remain, the evidence to date tends to support the five-factor model.
4. An enduring controversy in personality concerns the relative importance of traits compared to situational determinants of behavior. Critics have charged that traits do not predict behavior well and that there is little evidence for cross-situational consistency. Trait advocates have answered that if traits and behaviors are measured correctly, a significant relationship can be found. In addition, they maintain that the amount of behavior variance explained by traits is considerable and important.
5. The development of the five-factor model renewed interest in the relationship between personality and job performance. Although several of the Big Five dimensions are related to performance in the business world, many studies indicate that Conscientiousness may be the best predictor of performance.
6. Trait researchers typically rely on self-report assessment procedures in their work. One of the most commonly used self-report inventories is the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory. Test users need to be aware of problems inherent in self-report inventories. These include faking, carelessness and sabotage, and response tendencies.
7. Like other approaches to personality, the trait approach has strengths and is subject to criticisms. The strengths include a strong empirical base, a host of practical applications, and the large amount of research generated. Criticisms include the limited usefulness of the approach for dealing with problem behaviors and the lack of an agreed-upon framework.


