3.1 Introduction
We shall begin our study of atoms by summarizing our fundamental ideas about atomic structure. Every atom has an overall dimension of about IO-9 m. It is composed of a relatively massive nucleus (whose dimensions are of the order of IO-14 m) aboutwhich moveanumberofelectrons,eachofcharge—e,occupyingthe rest of the atomic volume. The nucleus is composed of A particles (A is the mass number) called nucleons, of which Z are protons {Z is the atomic number), each of charge+e,andN (= A —Z)areneutrons,whichhavenoelectriccharge. There­ fore the nucleus possesses a positive charge of + Ze. The number of electrons in any atom is equal to the number of protons (that is, Z of them) and therefore an atom is an electrically neutral system. However, in certain instances an atom may gain or lose some electrons, so that it becomes negatively or positively charged; in this case it is called an ion. The mass of the nucleon is about 1850 times the electron mass. Thus the mass of an atom is practically equal to that of its nucleus.
However, the Z electrons of an atom are responsible for most of the atomic properties which are reflected in the properties of matter in bulk, such as the elastic and electromagnetic properties of different materials. Electromagnetic interactions between electrons and nuclei of different atoms play the basic role in the binding together of atoms to form molecules, in chemical reactions, and in practically all the properties of matter in bulk.
We can explain the motion of the electrons around the nucleus if we consider only the electromagnetic interactions between the electrons and the components of the nucleus (protons and neutrons). Since electromagnetic interactions are well understood, it has been possible to develop an accurate description of the electronic motion. The corresponding problem for the nucleus, on the other hand, is more complex, since other interactions enter which are not so well understood. When we analyze electronic motion, we must use the methods of quantum mechanics dis­ cussed in the previous chapter.
In this chapter we shall discuss the properties of atoms and ions having just one electron (of which the simplest is the hydrogen atom) and in the following chapter we shall consider the problem of many-electron atoms. The one-electron atom will help us to understand the basic problems related to atomic structure.
3.2 The Hydrogen Atom
The simplest of all atoms is the hydrogen atom. Its nucleus is composed of only one particle, a proton, so that it has /1 = 1 and Z = I. Around the proton, a single electron moves. So that our calculation will be applicable to other atoms we shall assume, however, that the nucleus contains Z protons with a total positive charge equal to + Z e (Fig. 3-1). A t this moment we shall make two approximations. First, we shall consider the nucleus to be at rest in an inertial system. This is a reasonable assumption because the nucleus, being more massive than the electron, practically coincides with the center of mass of the atom, which certainly is at rest in an inertial system so long as no external forces act on the atom. Second, we shall assume that the electric field of the nucleus is that of a point charge. This is also reasonable,