The Supreme Court in Action
Given the millions of disputes that arise every year, the job of the Supreme Court would be impossible if it were not able to control the flow of cases and its own caseload.
Over the y ears, the courts hav e dev eloped specific rules that go vern which cases within their jurisdiction they will and will not hear . In order to be hear d by the courts, cases must meet certain criteria that are initially applied by the trial court but may be reconsidered by appellate courts. These rules of access can be broken down into three major categories: case or controversy, standing, and mootness.
Article III of the Constitution and Supreme Court decisions define judicial power as extending only to “cases and controversies.” This means that the case before a court must be an actual controversy, not a hypothetical one, with two truly adversarial parties. The courts have interpreted this language to mean that they do not have the power to r ender advisor y opinions to legislatures or agencies about the constitutionality of proposed laws or regulations. Furthermore, even after a law is enacted, the courts will generally refuse to consider its constitutionality until it is actually applied.
Parties to a case must also hav e standing—that is, they must sho w that they have a substantial stake in the outcome of the case. The traditional requirement for standing has been to show injury to oneself; that injury can be personal, economic, or even aesthetic, such as a neighbor ’s building a high fence that blocks one ’s view of the ocean. In order for a group or class of people to have standing (as in class-action suits), each member must show specific injury. This means that a general interest in the environment, for instance, does not provide a group with sufficient basis for standing.
The Supreme Court also uses a third criterion in determining whether it will hear a case: that of mootness. In theory, this requirement disqualifies cases that are brought too late—after the relevant facts have changed or the problem has been resolved by other means. The criterion of mootness, however, is subject to the discretion of the courts, which hav e begun to relax the rules of mootness, particularly in cases where a situation that has been resolved is likely to come up again. In the abortion case Roe v. Wade, for example, the Supreme Court rejected the lower court’s argument that because the pregnancy in question had already come to term, the case was moot. The Court agreed to hear the case because no pregnancy was likely to outlast the lengthy appeals process.28 Related to mootness but less frequently cited is the idea of ripeness, which means the readiness of a case. or litigation. The courts try to avoid becoming entangled in issues that remain hypothetical or events that may never occur.
Putting aside the formal criteria, the Supreme Court is most likely to accept cases that involve conflicting decisions by the federal circuit courts, cases that present important questions of civil rights or civil liber ties, and cases in which the federal government is the appellant. Ultimately, however, the question of which cases to accept can come down to the preferences and priorities of the justices. If a group of justices believes that the Court should intervene in a particular area of policy or politics, they are likely to look for a case or cases that will serve as vehicles for judicial intervention. For many years, the Court was not interested in considering challenges to affirmative action or other programs designed to provide particular benefits to minorities. In recent years, however, several of the Court’s more conservative justices have been eager to push back the limits of affirmative action and racial preference and have therefore accepted a number of cases that would allow them to do so. In the 2014 case Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action, for example, the Court ruled that a Michigan ballot initiative that resulted in a ban on racial preferences in college admissions was constitutional.29 The decision paved the way for other states to prohibit the use of race as a factor in college admissions. In the 2016 case of Fisher v. University of Texas, however, the Court ruled that race could be one of the factors taken into account in college admissions if the school so desired.Most cases reach the Supreme Court through a writ of certiorari. Certiorari is an order to a lower court to deliver the records of a particular case to be reviewed for legal err ors. The term certiorari is sometimes shortened to cert, and cases deemed to merit certiorari are referred to as “cert-worthy.” An individual who loses in a lower federal court or state court and wants the Supreme Court to review the decision has 90 days to file a petition for a writ of certiorari with the clerk of the U.S. Supreme Court. Petitions for thousands of cases are filed with the Court every year (see Figure 15.4).
Since 1972 most of the justices have participated in a “certiorari pool” in which their law clerks work together to evaluate the petitions. Each petition is reviewed by one clerk, who writes a memo for all the justices participating in the pool, summarizing the facts and issues and making a recommendation. Clerks for the other justices add their comments to the memo. After the justices have reviewed the memos, any one of them may place any case on the “discuss list,” which is circulated by the chief justice. I f a case is not placed on the discuss list, it is automatically denied certiorari. Cases placed on the discuss list are considered and voted on during the justices’ closed-door conference. or certiorari to be granted, four justices must be convinced that the case satisfies rule 10 of the Rules of the Supreme Court of the United States. Rule 10 states that certiorari is not a matter of right but is to be granted only when there are special and compelling reasons. These include conflicting decisions by two or more circuit courts, conflicts between circuit courts and state courts of last resort, conflicting decisions by two or more state courts of last resort, decisions b y circuit courts on matters of federal law that should be settled b y the Supreme Court, and a circuit court decision on an important question that conflicts with Supreme Court deci- sions. It should be clear from this list that the Court will usually take action under only the most compelling circumstances—when there are conflicts among the lower courts about what the law should be, when an important legal question has been raised in the lower courts but not definitively answered, or when a lower court deviates from the principles and precedents established by the high court. Few cases are able to gain the support of four justices needed for certiorari. In recent sessions, although thousands of petitions were filed, the Court has granted certiorari to barely more than 80 petitioners each y ear—about 1 per cent of those seeking a Supreme Court review.
A handful of cases reach the Supreme Court through avenues other than certiorari. One of these is the writ of certification, which can be used when a U.S. court of appeals asks the Supreme Court for instructions on a point of law that has never been decided. A second alternative avenue is the writ of appeal, which is used to appeal the decision of a three-judge district court.