The Goals of Economic Policy
The job of this and the next chapter is to step bey ond the politics and the institutions to look at the goals of government: the public policies. Public policy can be defined simply as
an officially expressed purpose or goal backed b y a sanction (a r eward or a punish - ment). Public policy can be embodied in a law, a rule, a regulation, or an order. This chapter will focus on policies aimed at the economy.
At the most basic lev el, government makes it possible for the economy to func - tion efficiently by setting the rules for economic exchange and punishing those who violate those rules. Among the most important rules for the economy are those that define property rights, contracts, and standards for goods. This kind of government rule making allo ws mar kets to expand b y making it easier for people who do not know each other to engage in economic transactions: they do not hav e to rely only on personal trust to do business. Likewise, government helps markets expand by cre- ating money and standing behind its value. Money allows diverse goods to be traded and greatly simplifies economic transactions. Without government involvement in providing and standardizing a national currency, it would be very difficult to pur- chase such basic items as gr oceries: imagine a world in which different stores used different currencies or in which y ou needed to trade something y ou made yourself for your groceries. This would be a major impediment to economic exchange!
Government involvement in the economy now extends far beyond these basic market-creating functions. G overnment has become inv olved in many aspects of the economy in or der to pr omote the public w ell-being. O f course, ther e is often vigorous disagreement about the extent to which go vernment should inter vene in the economy. Further, beliefs about which forms of government intervention in the economy are most necessary and most effective have changed over time. Although the policies have changed, government intervention in the economy has, for nearly a century, sought to achieve four fundamental goals: (1) to pr omote economic sta- bility, (2) to stimulate economic growth, (3) to promote business development, and (4) to protect employees and consumers.
PROMOTING STABLE MARKETS
One of the central r easons for government involvement in the economy is to pr otect the w elfare and pr operty of individuals and businesses. M aintaining law and or der is one of the most important ways go vernment can pr otect w elfare and pr operty. The federal government has also enacted laws designed to pr o- tect individuals and businesses in economic transactions. Federalracketeering laws, for example, aim to end criminal efforts to contr ol businesses thr ough such illegal means as extor tion and kickbacks.
Another r eason that Congr ess began to adopt national busi - ness regulatory policies was that companies felt bur dened by the inconsistent regulations across the various states. Companies often preferred a single, national r egulatory authority, no matter ho w
burdensome, because it would ensure consistency throughout the United States; the companies could ther eby treat the nation as a single market.3
The government also pr omotes economic stability b y providing public goods. This term refers to facilities the state provides because no single par ticipant can afford to pr ovide those facilities. The provision of public goods may entail supplying the physical mar - ketplace itself—such as the commons in N ew England towns or an interstate highway system to stimulate the tr ucking industry. The provision of public goods is essential to mar ket operation,
and the manner in which the government pr ovides these goods will affect the market’s character.
PROMOTING ECONOMIC PROSPERITY
In addition to setting the basic conditions that allow markets to function, 
governments may activ ely inter vene in the economy to pr omote economic gr owth. Although the idea that government should stimulate economic growth can be traced back to Alexander Hamilton’s views about promoting industry, it was not until the twentieth century that the federal government assumed such a role.

Measuring Economic Growth Since the 1930s the federal go vernment has car e- fully tracked national economic gr owth by measuring it in sev eral different ways. The two most important measures are the gross national product, which is the mar- ket value of the goods and services produced in the economy, and the gross domestic product (GDP), the same measure but excluding income from foreign investments. In the late 1990s the American economy grew at a rate of over 4 percent a year, consid- ered high by modern standards (see Figure 16.1). Growth was slower during the first decade of the 2000s, av eraging 1.9 per cent annually. This was largely the result of two recessions: one early after the turn of the centuyr and one that began in 2008. nI the middle part of the decade (2003–7), the economy gr ew at a strong 2.8 percent annually.4 As F igure 16.1 sho ws, the r ecession that began in 2008 led to negativ e economic growth in 2008 and 2009. Although the economy began to gr ow again after 2010, it remained below the high levels of growth experienced in the 1990s.
The engine of American economic growth has shifted over the centuries. In the 1800s the nation’s rich endowment of natural resources was especially important in propelling growth. Manufacturing industries became the driving force of economic growth during the late nineteenth centur y as mass pr oduction made it possible to manufacture goods at a pace that was once unimaginable. I n more recent times, the high-technology boom foster ed unanticipated and vigor ous economic gr owth that made the U nited States the envy of the world. D espite these v ery different economic engines, the basic prerequisites of growth were similar in each case: strong investment, technological innovation, and a productive workforce. Throughout the nation’s histor y, the federal go vernment has adopted policies to pr omote each of these conditions needed to sustain economic growth.
The most fundamental way that government affects investment is by promoting business as well as investor and consumer confidence. When businesses fear political instability, unpr edictable go vernment action, or widespr ead disr egard of the law , they are unlikely to invest. When consumers are insecure about the future, they are unlikely to spend.
The federal government also pr omotes inv estment thr ough its r egulation of financial markets. The most important federal agency in this r egard is the S ecu- rities and E xchange Commission (SEC), cr eated after the stock mar ket crash of 1929. The SEC requires companies to disclose information about the stocks and bonds they are selling, inform buyers of the investment risks, and protect investors against fraud. In this way the SEC helps maintain investor confidence and a strong supply of capital for American business. The SEC received harsh criticism during the financial crisis in 2008. Analysts pointed to weak SEC oversight and regulation as an important factor in the near collapse of the financial sector. Major financial reforms, including the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, substantially beefed up the SEC’s enforcement capabilities and required the agency to take the lead in implementing many of the key r egulations.5 However, a May 2018 law passed b y Congress and signed by President Trump eliminated some of the ne w regulations, especially for smaller banks.6
Public investment is another impor tant source of growth in the American eco - nomy. In the 1930s and again in the late 1970s the federal go vernment promoted public inv estment as a means to spar k economic growth. S ome kinds of public investment promote growth as a by-product of other, more central objectives. One of the most impor tant of these is spending on the nation ’s defense. M any analysts credited the rise in military spending associated with the war in Iraq with helping to spur economic growth in 2003.
The second important condition for economic growth is innovation. The fed- eral go vernment has sought to suppor t inno vation in a v ariety of ways. O ne of the most important is through the National Science Foundation. Created in 1950, the N ational Science F oundation suppor ts basic r esearch acr oss a range of fields in order to adv ance fundamental kno wledge that may be br oadly useful.7 Federal
government sponsorship of health r esearch began in the late 1800s. Today, the N ational I nstitutes of H ealth (NIH) conducts basic and applied r esearch in biomedicine. The Human Genome Project—the effort to map the basic genetic sturc- ture of human life—was initiated b y government researchers and only later taken up by private corporations. Recently, the NIH has taken the lead in basic r esearch to counter bioterrorism. Its efforts to understand the biology of v arious infectious agents and to develop vaccines are expected to produce important new knowledge about the human immune system. Research sponsored by the military has long been an important source of innovation for the American economy. Such key twentieth- century inno vations as radar and nuclear po wer stemmed fr om militar y r esearch. And as we saw in Chapter 14, militar y research also created the technology for the twenty-first century with ARPANET, the precursor to the internet.
A third fundamental condition for economic growth is a sufficient and productive workforce. Federal immigration policy has played a key role in ensuring an adequate supply of labor throughout American history. Immigration laws routinely give special priority to workers who have skills that are in demand among American employers. Immigrants with nursing degrees, for example, have long received special priority.
Today, a productive workforce is a highly educated workforce. Education, as we will see in Chapter 17, is primarily the responsibility of state and local governments. The federal government, however, supports the development of a productive work- force with a variety of programs to promote higher education, such as educational grants, tax breaks, and loans. The federal government also sponsors a limited array of job-training programs that focus primarily on low-skilled workers. Some analysts argue that the federal government must do much more to support the development of a highly skilled wor kforce if the U nited States is to sustain economic gr owth in the future.
Full Employment Before the 1930s neither the federal government nor the state gov- ernments sought to pr omote full emplo yment. Unemployment was widely vie wed as an unfor tunate occurr ence that go vernment could do little to alter . The New Deal response to the prolonged and massive unemployment of the Great Depression changed that view. The federal government put millions of people back to work on public projects sponsored by such programs as the Works Progress Administration. The bridges, parks, and buildings they constructed can still be seen across the United States today. The federal government viewed these programs as temporary measures, however. As the buildup forWorld War II boosted the economy and unemployment melted away, the employment programs were dismantled.
The New D eal and go vernment war time spending, ho wever, sho wed that go v- ernment could help ensur e full emplo yment. Public expectations changed as w ell: after the war , Americans looked to the federal go vernment to r educe unemplo y- ment. Moreover, economic theory now supported their expectations. John Maynard Keynes’s theories that government could boost employment by stimulating demand had become very influential.
Federal policy placed the most emphasis on achieving full emplo yment during the 1960s. Keynesian economists—who believe that putting money in the hands of consumers cr eates a str ong economy—in the Council of E conomic A dvisers persuaded President Kennedy to enact the first tax cut designed to stimulate the economy and promote full employment.8 The policy was widely seen as a success, and unemployment declined to a low of 3.4 percent in 1968. Favorable economic conditions in the 1990s reduced unemployment to record lows once again.
The worldwide economic recession of 2008 led to the loss of o ver 8 million American jobs. The Obama administration and Congr ess responded by passing a sweeping stimulus package called the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act in 2009, to help encourage economic growth, save existing jobs, and make longer-term investments that would encourage job cr eation, such as in w eatherization projects and clean-technology construction. Despite these actions, it was not until 2016 that the unemployment rates dipped below 5 percent.
Low Inflation During the 1970s and early 1980s inflation, a consis- tent increase in the general level of prices, was one of America’s most vexing pr oblems. Rising prices harm consumers, especially those
on a fixed income such as the elderly. Inflation also undermines the entire economy because it cr eates uncer tainty about futur e prices, making investors cautious. Inflation was finally reduced from its his- toric highs of nearly 20 percent down toward 2 and 3 percent a year by the mid-1980s. Since that time, inflation has remained low. Even so, economic policy makers watch prices closely for any sign of increasing inflation.

