How Does the Nervous System
Operate?
The nervous system’s response to the world around us is responsible for everything
we think, feel, or do. Essentially, each of us is a nervous system. The entire nervous
system is divided into two basic units: the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. The central nervous system (CNS) consists of the brain and the
spinal cord, both of which contain massive numbers of neurons (FIGURE 3.1). The
peripheral nervous system (PNS) consists of all the other nerve cells in the rest of the
body. The CNS and PNS are anatomically separate, but their functions are highly
interdependent. The PNS sends a variety of information to the CNS. The CNS organizes and evaluates that information and then directs the PNS to perform specific
behaviors or make bodily adjustments.
Neurons Are the Basic Units of
the Nervous System
The basic units of this system are the nerve cells, called neurons (FIGURE 3.2). These
cells receive, integrate, and transmit information in the nervous system. Complex net-
works of neurons sending and receiving signals are the functional basis of all psycho-
logical activity. Although the actions of single neurons are simple to describe, human
complexity results from billions of neurons. Each neuron communicates with tens of
thousands of other neurons. Neurons do not communicate randomly or arbitrarily,
however. They communicate selectively with other neurons to form circuits, or neural
networks. These networks develop through genetic influence, maturation and experience, and repeated firing. In other words, alliances form among groups of neurons.
As discussed more fully later in this chapter, the PNS includes the somatic and
autonomic nervous systems. The somatic component of the PNS is involved in voluntary behavior, such as when you reach for an object to see how it feels. The autonomic
component of the PNS is responsible for the less voluntary actions of your body, such
as controlling heart rate and other bodily functions.
FUNCTIONS OF NEURONS Neurons are specialized
for communication. That is, unlike other cells in the body,
nerve cells are excitable: They are powered by electrical impulses and communicate with other nerve cells
through chemical signals. During the reception phase,
neurons take in the chemical signals from neighbor-
ing neurons. During integration, incoming signals are
assessed. During transmission, neurons pass their own
signals to yet other receiving neurons.
Some neurons (sensory neurons) detect information from the physical world and pass that information
along to the brain, usually through the spinal cord. To
get a sense of how fast that process can work, think of
the last time you touched something hot or accidentally pricked yourself with a sharp object, such as a tack.
Those signals triggered your body’s nearly instantaneous
response and sensory experience of the impact. The sensory nerves that provide information from the skin and
muscles are called somatosensory nerves. (This term
comes from the Greek for “body sense.” It means sensations experienced from within the body.) Other neurons
(motor neurons) direct muscles to contract or relax,
thereby producing movement.
Sensory and motor neurons work together to control
movement. For instance, if you are using a pen to take
notes as you read these words, you are contracting and
relaxing your hand muscles and finger muscles to adjust
your fingers’ pressure on the pen. When you want to use
the pen, your brain sends a message via motor neurons
to your finger muscles so they move in specific ways.
Receptors in both your skin and your muscles send back
messages through sensory neurons to help determine
how much pressure is needed to hold the pen. This symphony of neural communication for a task as simple as using a pen is remarkable,
yet most of us employ motor control so easily that we rarely think about it. In fact,
our reflexes, automatic motor responses, occur before we even think about those
responses. For each reflex action, a handful of neurons simply convert sensation
into action.
NEURON STRUCTURE In addition to performing different functions, neurons have
a wide assortment of shapes and sizes. A typical neuron has four structural regions
that participate in communication functions: the dendrites, the cell body, the axon,
and the terminal buttons (FIGURE 3.3). The dendrites are short, branchlike append-
ages that detect chemical signals from neighboring neurons. In the cell body, also
known as the soma (Greek for “body”), the information received via the dendrites
from thousands of other neurons is collected and integrated.
Once the incoming information from many other neurons has been integrated
in the cell body, electrical impulses are transmitted along a long, narrow outgrowth
known as the axon. Axons vary tremendously in length, from a few millimeters to
more than a meter. The longest axons stretch from the spinal cord to the big toe.
You may have heard the term nerve in reference to a “pinched nerve.” In this con-
text, a nerve is a bundle of axons that carry information between the brain and other specific locations in the body. At the end of the axon are knoblike structures called
terminal buttons.
The site where chemical communication occurs between neurons is called the
synapse. Since neurons do not touch one another, they communicate by sending
chemicals into the synapse, a tiny gap between the terminal buttons of the “sending”
neuron and the dendrites of the “receiving” neurons. Chemicals leave one neuron,
cross the ­ synapse, and pass signals along to the dendrites of other neurons.
The outer surface of a neuron is a membrane, a fatty barrier that does not dissolve
in the watery environment inside and outside the neuron. The membrane is semipermeable. In other words, some substances move in or out of the membrane, and some
do not. Located on the membrane are ion channels. These specialized pores allow ions
to pass in and out of the cell when the neuron transmits signals down the axon. Ions
are electrically charged molecules, some charged negatively and some charged positively. By controlling the movement of ions, the membrane plays an important role
in communication between neurons: It regulates the concentration of electrically
charged molecules that are the basis of the neuron’s electrical activity.
central nervous system (CNS)
The brain and the spinal cord.
peripheral nervous system (PNS)
All nerve cells in the body that are not
part of the central nervous system.
The peripheral nervous system
includes the somatic and autonomic
nervous systems.
neurons
The basic units of the nervous system;
cells that receive, integrate, and
transmit information in the nervous
system. They operate through
electrical impulses, communicate
with other neurons through chemical
signals, and form neural networks.
dendrites
Branchlike extensions of the neuron
that detect information from other
neurons.
cell body
The site in the neuron where
information from thousands of other
neurons is collected and integrated.
axon
A long, narrow outgrowth of a neuron
by which information is conducted
from the cell body to the terminal
buttons.
terminal buttons
At the ends of axons, small nodules
that release chemical signals from the
neuron into the synapse.
synapse
The gap between the terminal
buttons of a “sending” neuron
and the dendrites of a “receiving”
neuron; the site at which chemical
communication occurs between
neurons.